# Substance_Abuse

Substance abuse remains a critical public health challenge with multifaceted implications for individuals, families, and communities worldwide. This project explores how machine learning techniques can predict and classify substance abuse behaviours, focusing on alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, and nicotine vaping. Leveraging data from the (2021-2022) Behavioural Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) in 2023, we aim to identify the key predictors of substance abuse and groups at higher risk, taking into account factors like adverse childhood experiences, financial conditions, and mental health status. 

Prediction models were developed using four types of machine learning algorithms, including Linear Models (Logistic Regression \& SVM), Tree based Models (Random Forest, XGBoost \& ADABoost), Neural Networks (MLP \& CNN) and Clustering algorithm. Respondents were randomly divided into training and testing samples. The performance of all the models was compared using accuracy, precision, recall, AUC and false positive rate. The study included 31060 respondents of whom, 5867 (19\%) were found to be substance abusers. Of the respondents who reported substance abuse 62.93\% were between the ages of 18-64, 60.61\% were males and 84.76\% were non-Hispanic Whites. Random Forest was the best performing model with AUC 0.86, followed by XGBoost(AUC 0.85). The most important factors for substance abuse were BMI, male sex, lower income levels, young adult age group, lower education levels, poor mental health and adverse childhood experiences. Data mining methods were useful in examining patterns across demographics, health conditions and lifestyle behaviours so as to understand the co-morbidities associated with substance abuse. 

Another goal of this project was to highlight the importance of collaboration between domain experts and machine learning practitioners and assess the impact it has on the results compared to when domain experts are not involved. Their contributions in feature selection and data interpretability solutions were instrumental in achieving this enhancement. We prioritized model interpretability to foster trust and refine understanding. Additionally, our project introduces a novel approach to interpretability, analysing misclassified data, offering insights into substance abuse dynamics. These results can be used to generate further hypotheses for research, increase public awareness and help provide targeted substance abuse education.
